blog: Add blog post about plain Kustomize+Kluctl (#53)
kluctl/www-kluctl.io: content/en/blog/2022-11-16-templating-and-diffs-with-kustomize.md

---
title: "Templating in Kustomize with Kluctl style deploy and diff"
linkTitle: "Templating in Kustomize with Kluctl style deploy and diff"
slug: templating-and-diffs-with-kustomize
date: 2022-11-16
author: Alexander Block (@codablock)
images:
  - "/images/blog/image.jpg"
---

![image](/images/blog/image.jpg)

[Kustomize](https://kustomize.io/) is currently one of the most used tools to organise Kubernetes manifests and the
resulting deployments. As of the Kustomize website, "Kustomize introduces a template-free way to customize application
configuration that simplifies the use of off-the-shelf applications."

This says it very clear: Kustomize is template-free. The reasoning why Kustomize does not leverage templating and also
will never do so is very reasonable and easy to understand. It tries to avoid the potential overload and complexity that
comes with templating.

In my opinion however, the feared complexity is only a problem if one tries to suit the needs of everyone. This is an

> issue that popular [Helm Charts](https://helm.sh) have for example. If you try to make everyone happy, your templates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
issue that popular [Helm Charts](https://helm.sh) do have for example. If you try to make everyone happy, your templates
```

must make everything configurable, which eventually leads to Kubernetes manifests having more templating code than

> actual YAML.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the actual YAML.
```

That sounds a bit selfish, doesn't it? :) But let's be honest to our self, many times you just need to create a
deployment that suits your own needs right now. This deployment might re-use other components which it needs to
customize, but it doesn't need to be customized by someone else.

Thus, the level of customization that you need to implement is minimal. Maybe you just want to allow changing the
target namespace or some replica count depending on the target environment. Maybe you want to have some components
enabled in one environment and other components disabled in other environments. If you think more about it, you might
also realise that it's not about "customization" anymore but actually about "configuration".

In that case, templating does not bring the risks that come with components that are meant to be re-used and customized.
This is because it is very clear what level of configuration is required and thus the use of templating can be reduced
to exactly that. In the end, you'll only need a few places with something like `{{ my_service.replicas }}` and maybe some
conditional blocks with `{% if my_service.enabled %}...{% endif %}`.

> On the other hand, using plain Kustomize to achieve the same can easily become unnecessarily complex. For example, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, using plain Kustomize to achieve the same result can easily become unnecessarily complex. For example, the
```

to adapt to the way overlays work. Templating would allow much simpler solutions in the above case.

But...Kustomize doesn't support templating, right?

## Bringing templating to Kustomize

[Kluctl](https://kluctl.io) builds a large set of its features and promised advantages on top of
[templating](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/templating/). The
[Kustomize integration](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/deployments/kustomize/) also allows templating in all
involved resources, including the `kustomization.yaml` itself and all referenced manifests.

Configuration can be provided in different ways:
1. Via [CLI arguments](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/commands/common-arguments/#project-arguments), e.g. `--arg` or `--args-from-file`.
2. Via [Targets](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/kluctl-project/targets/#args), meaning that you can define named targets with fixed args.
3. Via [vars](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/deployments/deployment-yml/#vars-deployment-project) in Kluctl deployments.
4. Via [Environment variables](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/commands/environment-variables/#environment-variables-as-arguments) (through `KLUCTL_ARG_XXX`).

> In this blog post, we'll concentrate on the first option for simplicity. The second and third options are much more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog post, we'll focus on the first option for simplicity. The second and third options are much more
```

> powerful, but requires more boilerplate to set up a [Kluctl project](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/kluctl-project/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
powerful, but require more boilerplate to set up a [Kluctl project](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/kluctl-project/)
```

and [Kluctl deployments](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/deployments/deployment-yml). The first option also works with

> plain Kustomize deployments, which is what I'm going to demonstrate here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plain Kustomize deployments, which is what I'm going to demonstrate.
```

Whatever option is used, all "args" are then available in every place by simply using
[Jinja2 variable expressions](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.1.x/templates/#variables), e.g. `{{ args.my_arg }}`.

## A simple example

We will use the [podtato-head](https://github.com/podtato-head/podtato-head) project, specifically the
[Kustomize delivery scenario](https://github.com/podtato-head/podtato-head/tree/main/delivery/kustomize) as an example

> here. But first, we'll need a test cluster. I suggest to simply use [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) and create a fresh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. But first, we'll need a test cluster. I suggest to simply use [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) and create a fresh
```

cluster:

```shell
$ kind create cluster
Creating cluster "kind" ...
 ✓ Ensuring node image (kindest/node:v1.25.3) 🖼 
 ✓ Preparing nodes 📦  
 ✓ Writing configuration 📜 
 ✓ Starting control-plane 🕹️ 
 ✓ Installing CNI 🔌 
 ✓ Installing StorageClass 💾 
Set kubectl context to "kind-kind"
You can now use your cluster with:

kubectl cluster-info --context kind-kind

Thanks for using kind! 😊
```

> Ensure that you are on the correct Kubernetes context by calling `kubectl config current-context` and verifying that it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure that you are on the correct Kubernetes context by calling `kubectl config current-context` and verify that it
```

  default/Deployment/podtato-head-left-arm
  default/Deployment/podtato-head-left-leg
  default/Deployment/podtato-head-right-arm
  default/Deployment/podtato-head-right-leg
  default/Service/podtato-head-entry
  default/Service/podtato-head-hat
  default/Service/podtato-head-left-arm
  default/Service/podtato-head-left-leg
  default/Service/podtato-head-right-arm
  default/Service/podtato-head-right-leg
  default/ServiceAccount/podtato-head
? The diff succeeded, do you want to proceed? (y/N) y
✓ .: Applied 14 objects.
✓ Running server-side apply for all objects

New objects:
  default/ConfigMap/podtato-head-service-discovery
  default/Deployment/podtato-head-entry
  default/Deployment/podtato-head-hat
  default/Deployment/podtato-head-left-arm
  default/Deployment/podtato-head-left-leg
  default/Deployment/podtato-head-right-arm
  default/Deployment/podtato-head-right-leg
  default/Service/podtato-head-entry
  default/Service/podtato-head-hat
  default/Service/podtato-head-left-arm
  default/Service/podtato-head-left-leg
  default/Service/podtato-head-right-arm
  default/Service/podtato-head-right-leg
  default/ServiceAccount/podtato-head
```

> It will first show you what it will do, then ask for confirmation and finally show what it did. Verify that it got

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`kluctl` shows you the diff it will apply, asks for confirmation, applies the changes and then shows you the applied result. Verify that it got
```

deployed:

```shell
$ kubect get pod
NAME                                      READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
podtato-head-entry-7dfd8cdd6d-6mtxd       1/1     Running   0          95s
podtato-head-hat-6bcbf5f957-mfc6r         1/1     Running   0          95s
podtato-head-left-arm-7d9db78544-689tx    1/1     Running   0          95s
podtato-head-left-leg-59f45ffc4-grcjc     1/1     Running   0          95s
podtato-head-right-arm-5444b48b85-427w7   1/1     Running   0          95s
podtato-head-right-leg-f68df999f-g27nz    1/1     Running   0          95s
```

There are multiple things that you might have noticed already:

> 1. Kustomize does not handle deployments, it just "builds" them and then lets you handle the actual deployment via `kubectl apply -f`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Kustomize does not handle deployments, it just "builds" them and then let's you handle the actual deployment via `kubectl apply -f`.
```

change the replicas field to:
```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-entry
...
spec:
  replicas: {{ args.entry_replicas }}
...
```

If you'd try to re-deploy this now, it will throw an error about `args.entry_replicas` being undefined. So let's call
Kluctl with the now required arg:

```shell
$ kluctl deploy -a entry_replicas=3
...

Changed objects:
  default/Deployment/podtato-head-entry

Diff for object default/Deployment/podtato-head-entry
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Path          | Diff                                                         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| spec.replicas | -1                                                           |
|               | +3                                                           |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
? The diff succeeded, do you want to proceed? (y/N)
```

You'll notice that Kluctl again stops and asks for confirmation. But this time, it will actually show you some

> meaningful diff. It allows you to verify that what Kluctl is going to do is actually what you intended to do. The diff

Reviewer: ```suggestion
meaningful diff. It allows you to verify that Kuctl will apply the intended changes. The diff
```

Author: Can you change the suggestion to with Kuctl -> Kluctl? :)

Author: Ah cool, just realized that I can edit your suggestion by myself :)

that you see is NOT a simple file based diff, but a diff after performing a full-blown server-side apply in dry-run
mode. This means, what you see is what you'll get, no surprises in-between!

Let's confirm with `y`:

```shell
? The diff succeeded, do you want to proceed? (y/N) y
✓ .: Applied 14 objects.
✓ Running server-side apply for all objects

Changed objects:
  default/Deployment/podtato-head-entry

Diff for object default/Deployment/podtato-head-entry
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Path          | Diff                                                         |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| spec.replicas | -1                                                           |
|               | +3                                                           |
+---------------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
```

> It then performs the actual deployment and then prints what actually happened, which should always be identical to what

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The actual deployment is performed and the result printed to the user. The result should always be identical to the diff you saw before.
```

> was shown in the diff before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Let's make something conditional

Now let's make the "hat" of the podtate-head optional. However, as you have previously deployed the project already,

> you'll need to delete the hat deployment manually now:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you'll need to delete the hat deployment manually:
```

```shell
$ kubectl delete deployment.apps/podtato-head-hat service/podtato-head-hat
```

Edit `kustomization.yaml` and put an if/endif around the hat resource:

```yaml
...
resources:
- configmap-discovery.yaml
{% if args.hat_enabled | default(true) %}
- deployment-hat.yaml
- service-hat.yaml # also remove the original entry from the bottom of the file
{% endif %}
- deployment-left-arm.yaml
...
```

You can now deploy with Kluctl while having the hat disabled:

```shell
$ kluctl deploy -a entry_replicas=3 -a hat_enabled=false
```

If you deploy with a hat and then with `hat_enabled=false`, Kluctl will not delete/prune the previously deployed hat.
If you want to have pruning support, you must create a [Kluctl deployment](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/deployments/)
with `commonLabels` enabled, so that Kluctl knows how to identify related objects.

## Using vars files instead of arguments

`args` can also be passed via vars files, which are arbitrary structured YAML files. This is a comparable to helm value
files. Consider the following examples.

test-args.yaml:
```yaml
entry_replicas: 2
hat_enabled: false
```

prod-args.yaml:
```yaml
entry_replicas: 3
```

> These can now be used with `--args-from-file`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These values can be used with `--args-from-file`:
```

```shell
$ kluctl diff --args-from-file=test-args.yaml
$ kluctl diff --args-from-file=prod-args.yaml
```

Based on that, you can easily implement multi-environment deployments. This is however still a poor-mans solution to
multi-environment deployments, with the use of [Kluctl projects](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/kluctl-project/)

> being the better solution. These allow you to define named [targets](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/kluctl-project/targets/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
being the better solution. Said projects allow you to define named [targets](https://kluctl.io/docs/reference/kluctl-project/targets/)
```
